Now that we've covered the
forEach terminal operation,
which is pretty simple
and somewhat limited
to simple print statements
as we've been showing,
let's turn our attention to a
much more interesting terminal
operation, which is the
collect terminal operation.
And we'll see that collect
has got a lot more features.
And it also not surprisingly is
also more complicated to learn
and to program than forEach.
But the nice part is it does
a lot more useful things.
As before, we're going
to use the Hamlet
program to showcase many
of the elements of collect.
So collect is an example of
a stream terminal operation
that returns collections.
No surprise there with
a name like collect.
And we'll see that there's many
different kinds of collections
that can be returned.
This particular example is shown
in the ex12 folder in my GitHub
repository.
And there's a bunch
of different methods
that are used to
demonstrate this.
They all have the
prefix runCollectTo.
And it'll be runCollectTo
list, runCollectTo set,
and so on and so forth.
So if you take a look
at those methods,
you can follow along with the
examples that I'm showing here.
So as before, what
we're going to do
is start by creating a list
of characters of Hamlet.
Then we turn that list
of characters of Hamlet
into a stream, do all the
filtering, and mapping,
and sorting and so on.
And then we're going to collect
the results into different data
structures, different
collections.
And the purpose of
collect in a nutshell
is to perform what's known
as a mutable reduction
on all elements of a stream
using some type of collector
in order to return a
single reduced result.
You can do various
things with collectors.
Collectors will be able
to, say, summarize elements
according to various
criteria, doing things
like finding min
or max or whatnot.
You can also use them more
commonly to accumulate elements
into various types
of collections,
which is what our focus will
be in this part of the lesson.
So let's first take a look
at collecting into a list.
So if you use the ToList
factory method, which
is defined on the
collectors utility class
in the Java streams
package, what that does
is that returns a
collector that is
implemented using an ArrayList.
And as you undoubtedly
recall, an ArrayList
can be used in a way that
contains duplicates just
like a LinkedList.
All you know is that you've
got a bunch of elements
in some order--
0, 1, 2, 3, et
cetera in the list.
And they could be duplicates.
They don't have
to be duplicates,
but duplicates are possible.
So that's what collect
with ToList does.
It collects into a list
that may have duplicates.
One of the things to
note here if you go back
and compare this with
the forEach example
that we saw before
is this approach
is much less
error-prone than forEach
because the initialization
is implicit.
It's actually handled
by the collector,
the list collector we see here.
And this code is also
inherently thread-safe.
So if we were to try to move
this from a sequential stream
as we have now to
a parallel stream
by making that one
miniscule change of stream
to parallel stream, you
would see that the result
would work just the same.
And it would be
properly initialized.
You wouldn't have to sit
there and go back and change
the types of the
variables that are passed
to have side effects to
forEach, et cetera, et cetera,
et cetera.
Much, much cleaner way to go.
Let's now turn our attention
to a different predefined
collector.
I guess I should
have pointed out
before that ToList is a
predefined collector that's
part of the collectors
utility class.
Let's now take a look
at another collector.
This is the ToSet collector.
This is the one that is
implemented using a HashSet.
If you call the ToSet factor
method on the collectors
utility class, you'll
end up getting back
a HashSet that can be accessed,
of course, as a set, which
is what we're showing
in this example.
And this is the runCollectToSet
method in the test program
we were looking at before.
What this does is it returns
the results in a HashSet.
And if you may recall your
Java Collections background,
a half set can
contain no duplicates.
So there can be no
duplicate copies here.
Every value has to
be a unique value.
There is yet another
type of collection
we can create using
a factor method which
is defined in the
collectors utility class.
This is the ToMap
factory method.
And this creates
a collector that
can be used to merge
the stream or collect
the stream into a HashMap.
And what happens here as we show
here, the map we're defining
will have a string as the key
and an integer as the value.
And under the hood,
HashMap is implemented
in later versions of Java
as either a HashTable
with a LinkedList
coming off whenever
you hash to the same location.
Or again, in later
versions of Java,
they actually organized
things if you have
lots of elements in a certain--
that all hash to the
same certain location,
then the HashMap actually
uses a balanced binary tree
at that point in order to reduce
the amount of time required
to determine whether an
element is present or not
and update its value.
So when we call
the ToMap method,
we get back a
collector that will
create a key with
whatever we give
as the value as
the first parameter
to ToMap collector, which
in this particular case
is going to be the identity
function, which will simply
make the stream element
the key in the map.
And then we make that
value in this map
be the length of a given string.
And if, for some
reason, we end up
with duplicate merged
entries, then we're
simply going to go
ahead and add together
the length of the merged
entry to the existing entry.
And that'll simply
sum up and give you
a new value for the map.
So it'll end up being
a map of string names
and then the lengths
of each of the names.
And if you have
duplicates, it'll
be adding that to a running sum
as being the value in the map.
Not necessarily all
that useful in this case
to have to deal with
duplicate entries,
but this is an interesting
example of using a map.
There are even
more powerful ways
of being able to create maps.
And one of those ways is by
using a groupingBy collector.
GroupingBy is a very
interesting factoring method
that creates a
collector that has
more options than the
simple ToMap factor method.
So what we're
going to do here is
we're going to create a
TreeMap that will group
the elements according
to the name, which
is the key in the map, and
the name length, the value.
So using the name and the
length as the key and value
is actually very similar
to what we do with ToMap.
But unlike the
ToMap factor method,
which only works for
HashMaps, for groupingBy,
we can actually indicate what
kind of map we want to use.
So in this particular
case, we're
going to use, once again,
the identity function, which
is often called the
classifier function.
And what this will do
in this particular case
is it simply uses
the Hamlet character
name starting with H, of course,
as an index into the map.
And that'll become the string.
I kind of think of
the groupingBy method
in the classifier function
as being a little bit
like the drawer organizer you
put in silverware drawers,
where you put forks
in one drawer.
And you put small forks in
another part of the drawer.
You put knives in yet
You put spoons in another
part of the drawer.
So you have this organizer that
kind of classifies the utensils
and puts them in the right bin.
That's kind of the metaphor to
have in the back of your mind
when you're thinking
about groupingBy.
As you can see here,
the particular type
of map we're going to use
is called a TreeMap, which
is a balanced binary tree.
I believe it uses something
like a red-black tree
or whatever as its balancing
algorithm data structure.
And so by passing in a
constructor reference,
we can instruct the
GroupingBy collector to make
a TreeMap instead of a HashMap.
So that could be
useful if there's
some reason you want
to avoid the worst case
performance of HashMap.
Although as I mentioned,
HashMaps are now much smarter
in Java.
And they adaptively
make themselves
into balance trees probably
using a TreeMap-like structure
if too many items hash to the
same location in the HashTable.
And then the last
piece of the puzzle
here is something that's
called a downstream collector.
And this is a collector
that's applied
to the results of the
classifier function.
So after we've
classified something,
then we go ahead and call
the downstream collector.
And what that's going
to do in this case
is that's going to
keep a running sum
of the length of the string.
So summingLong, as
we'll see, is basically
a way to sum things up.
So this is a pretty cool
example of using GroupingBy.
We'll see GroupingBy used in
many of our later examples
because it's a very useful
collector that gives you
lots of powerful features,
especially the ability
to define the type of the map
and the downstream collector.
So keep an eye out for that
in the not too distant future
Let's now take a look
at yet another way
to be able to create a stream.
And this is one that uses the
splitAsStream method, which
is defined as part of the Java
regular expression pattern
matching package.
And what we're
going to do here is
we're going to give a string
to the splitAsStream method.
And you can see that
that string is just
all the names of the characters
in Hamlet separated by commas--
just one string.
And then we're going
to go ahead and compile
a regular expression
that uses the comma
as the splitter for the string.
And so what it does,
what splitAsStream does,
is it takes the compiled
regular expression.
And it goes ahead and
reads in the string.
And it splits up that string
using comma as the splitter.
So of course, we're going to
end up with a stream of strings
corresponding to
the names in Hamlet.
That just kind of illustrating
the use of splitAsStream
with a regular expression.
And as before, we can use
our GroupingBy approach
to map things just
like we talked about.